TITLE:  Swim England Adult Swimming Framework
URL:    https://www.swimming.org/learntoswim/swim-england-adult-swimming-framework/
LENGTH: 3838 characters of rendered text

This site uses cookies to store information on your computer.

We use essential cookies to make this website work, including those required for secure payments processed by Stripe and PayPal. These cookies enable safe transactions, fraud prevention, and session integrity.

We’d also like to use optional cookies to improve your experience by collecting information about how you use the site.

For more information, please see our Cookie Policy.

Accept all cookiesDeny non-essential cookies
Necessary Cookies

Necessary cookies enable core functionality such as page navigation and access to secure areas. The website cannot function properly without these cookies, and can only be disabled by changing your browser preferences.

Analytical Cookies

Analytical cookies help us to improve our website by collecting and reporting information on its usage.

Show vendors within this category
analytics
On
Off
Marketing Cookies

We use marketing cookies to help us improve the relevancy of suggested content and advertising campaigns.

Show vendors within this category
marketing
On
Off
Functional Cookies

Functional cookies enable enhanced features and personalisation, such as remembering preferences or enabling chat support. These cookies do not track users across other websites.

Show vendors within this category
functional
On
Off
Close
Swimming.org
Swim England
Safeguarding and Welfare
Our Sports
Members
Learn to Swim
Institute of Swimming
PoolFinder

Login / Register

More
 Learn to Swim

Learn to Swim

A guide to the Learn to Swim Programme

Home
About
Awards
Parents
Learners
Teachers
My Learn To Swim App
Buy Awards
More
Swim England Adult Swimming Framework
Learn to Swim Programme

The Swim England Adult Swimming Framework is about improving confidence, technique and safety in the water, with no age limit.

Not everyone is able to reach their potential in the water during their school years. This is where swimming lessons using our Adult Swimming Framework can help.

Around 30% of adults in the UK can’t swim a length. Yet, one quarter of adult non-swimmers would like to learn how.
(Love Swimming, 2019)

The Adult Swimming Framework

With four progressive stages and Awards to choose from, the Swim England Adult Swimming Framework is suitable for everyone, from complete beginners to experienced swimmers who would just like some additional coaching to improve their technique.

Adults have very different needs to children when learning to swim – as an adult, you have different motivations and learn in different ways.

Our Adult Swimming Framework takes this into account, providing goals and targets suitable for those aged 16+.

Take a look at the skills you will cover during the Adult Swimming Framework.

Where to start

Find a centre near you that delivers Swim England adult swimming lessons.

Find your nearest Swim England Adult Learn To Swim lessons
Find pools
Use current location

Learning to swim, or improving your swimming with a centre that delivers lessons using our Adult Swimming Framework ensures you develop the right skills to become confident, safe and competent in the water.

There are over 1000 leisure centres and swim schools in the UK that deliver Swim England Adult Learn to Swim lessons.

What next?

Completing the Adult Swimming Framework open the doors to many opportunities.

As well as being able to enjoy general swimming with family and friends, you could move into the competitive side of swimming or join a Masters club which are aimed at adults over the age of 18.

Find out more about getting into Masters swimming at the Masters Swimming Hub here.

Learn to Swim Programme
Discover Adult Swimming Framework Awards
Adult Learn to Swim Awards
Adult Distance Awards
© Copyright 2026
Swimming.orgPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseCookie PolicySwim England Jobs
Website by Skylab
