TITLE:  Improving your kicking in breaststroke | Just Swim health and advice
URL:    https://www.swimming.org/justswim/improving-your-kicking-in-breaststroke/
LENGTH: 3267 characters of rendered text

This site uses cookies to store information on your computer.

We use essential cookies to make this website work, including those required for secure payments processed by Stripe and PayPal. These cookies enable safe transactions, fraud prevention, and session integrity.

We’d also like to use optional cookies to improve your experience by collecting information about how you use the site.

For more information, please see our Cookie Policy.

Accept all cookiesDeny non-essential cookies
Necessary Cookies

Necessary cookies enable core functionality such as page navigation and access to secure areas. The website cannot function properly without these cookies, and can only be disabled by changing your browser preferences.

Analytical Cookies

Analytical cookies help us to improve our website by collecting and reporting information on its usage.

Show vendors within this category
analytics
On
Off
Marketing Cookies

We use marketing cookies to help us improve the relevancy of suggested content and advertising campaigns.

Show vendors within this category
marketing
On
Off
Functional Cookies

Functional cookies enable enhanced features and personalisation, such as remembering preferences or enabling chat support. These cookies do not track users across other websites.

Show vendors within this category
functional
On
Off
Close
Swimming.org
Swim England
Safeguarding and Welfare
Our Sports
Members
Learn to Swim
Institute of Swimming
PoolFinder

Login / Register

More
 Just Swim
Home
About
Love Swimming
Be Healthier
Be Fitter
Be Happier
Improve your kicking in breaststroke

Developing your breaststroke kicking technique is vital for improving your swimming.

The breaststroke kick provides most of the propulsion, and it is the most technical kick of the four common swimming strokes.

We’ve developed some basic kicking tips to help you improve, as well as a useful video at the bottom of this page.

Sign in to our Members Area on swimming.org to view more breaststroke videos, as well as more useful tips on health and nutrition.

Tips for kicking in breaststroke
The breaststroke kick starts with your legs in a streamlined position and your feet pointed.
Bring your heels towards your bottom with the soles of your feet facing the ceiling.
As your heels near your bottom, your knees should be a little over hip-width apart, facing down and slightly out.
Concentrate on bringing your feet to your bottom rather than your knees to your chest.
As your heels come up, turn your feet and knees out and push backwards in a circular motion.
Keep your feet in this flat, turned out position rather than loose.
The kick finishes with your legs together, stretched an in a streamlined position with your feet pointed.
Breaststroke kicking video

This short video from our Swim England Members site will help you get your breathing right. Remember, practice makes perfect.

Swimming Strokes
Discover swimming at your local pool
Find pools
Use current location
Other articles from this section
Improving your arm technique in backstroke
Improve your breathing in front crawl
The best swimming stroke for weight loss
Tips for getting breaststroke right
© Copyright 2026
Swimming.orgPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseCookie PolicySwim England Jobs
Website by Skylab
