TITLE:  Improving your breathing in front crawl | Just Swim health and advice
URL:    https://www.swimming.org/justswim/improving-your-breathing-in-front-crawl/
LENGTH: 3895 characters of rendered text

This site uses cookies to store information on your computer.

We use essential cookies to make this website work, including those required for secure payments processed by Stripe and PayPal. These cookies enable safe transactions, fraud prevention, and session integrity.

We’d also like to use optional cookies to improve your experience by collecting information about how you use the site.

For more information, please see our Cookie Policy.

Accept all cookiesDeny non-essential cookies
Necessary Cookies

Necessary cookies enable core functionality such as page navigation and access to secure areas. The website cannot function properly without these cookies, and can only be disabled by changing your browser preferences.

Analytical Cookies

Analytical cookies help us to improve our website by collecting and reporting information on its usage.

Show vendors within this category
analytics
On
Off
Marketing Cookies

We use marketing cookies to help us improve the relevancy of suggested content and advertising campaigns.

Show vendors within this category
marketing
On
Off
Functional Cookies

Functional cookies enable enhanced features and personalisation, such as remembering preferences or enabling chat support. These cookies do not track users across other websites.

Show vendors within this category
functional
On
Off
Close
Swimming.org
Swim England
Safeguarding and Welfare
Our Sports
Members
Learn to Swim
Institute of Swimming
PoolFinder

Login / Register

More
 Just Swim
Home
About
Love Swimming
Be Healthier
Be Fitter
Be Happier
Improve your breathing in front crawl

While it is the most popular swimming stroke, mastering breathing in front crawl can be a challenging aspect for many swimmers.

Knowing how to inhale, and when to exhale, can prevent people from progressing as a swimmer and enjoying their time in the pool.

We’ve developed some basic breathing tips to help you improve, as well as a useful video at the bottom of this page.

Sign in to our Members Area on swimming.org to view more front crawl videos, as well as more useful tips on health and nutrition.

Tips for breathing in front crawl
The breath cycle is commonly every three or five arm strokes
Make sure you exhale under the water and try not to hold your breath. It may be a trickle (gentle and continuous) or explosive (all in one go). It can be through your mouth, nose or a combination of the two.
The head stays in the bow wave, and smoothly turns to one side, not lifting forwards, to inhale as the body rotates. As the body starts to rotate to one side, the arm on the same side will pass by your side.
The bow wave will create a trough or pocket of air for you to breathe into, protecting your mouth and nose from the water.
As you turn your head, keep your opposite arm extended in front of you and in line with your shoulder. It will be about 20-30 cm under the water with your elbow higher than your wrist. Your wrist higher than your finger tips.
As you see your hand coming over the top of the water (on the same side), start to rotate your body back to horizontal. Your head rotates in line with your body.
As the body starts to rotate back into the water, the hand that is extended out in front will now start the pull phase.
Your face returns to the water before your hand does.
Try to keep the rhythm of your stroke unaffected by breathing.
Front crawl breathing video

This short video from our Swim England Members site will help you get your breathing right. Remember, practice makes perfect.

Swimming Strokes
Discover swimming at your local pool
Find pools
Use current location
Other articles from this section
Improving your arm technique in backstroke
Improve your kicking in breaststroke
The best swimming stroke for weight loss
Tips for getting breaststroke right
© Copyright 2026
Swimming.orgPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseCookie PolicySwim England Jobs
Website by Skylab
