TITLE:  Improving Your Arm Technique in Backstroke | Just Swim
URL:    https://www.swimming.org/justswim/improving-your-arm-technique-in-backstroke/
LENGTH: 3420 characters of rendered text

This site uses cookies to store information on your computer.

We use essential cookies to make this website work, including those required for secure payments processed by Stripe and PayPal. These cookies enable safe transactions, fraud prevention, and session integrity.

We’d also like to use optional cookies to improve your experience by collecting information about how you use the site.

For more information, please see our Cookie Policy.

Accept all cookiesDeny non-essential cookies
Necessary Cookies

Necessary cookies enable core functionality such as page navigation and access to secure areas. The website cannot function properly without these cookies, and can only be disabled by changing your browser preferences.

Analytical Cookies

Analytical cookies help us to improve our website by collecting and reporting information on its usage.

Show vendors within this category
analytics
On
Off
Marketing Cookies

We use marketing cookies to help us improve the relevancy of suggested content and advertising campaigns.

Show vendors within this category
marketing
On
Off
Functional Cookies

Functional cookies enable enhanced features and personalisation, such as remembering preferences or enabling chat support. These cookies do not track users across other websites.

Show vendors within this category
functional
On
Off
Close
Swimming.org
Swim England
Safeguarding and Welfare
Our Sports
Members
Learn to Swim
Institute of Swimming
PoolFinder

Login / Register

More
 Just Swim
Home
About
Love Swimming
Be Healthier
Be Fitter
Be Happier
Improving your arm technique in backstroke

Improving your backstroke arm technique will make the biggest impact on your efficiency in the water.

Read our backstroke arm technique tips from our resident Swim England coaches Lucy and Carolyn, or watch the video below to improve your swimming.

Backstroke Arm Technique Tips
In backstroke, the arm action will provide the majority of the propulsion.
The arms are continuous and alternating with one arm providing propulsion under the water whilst the other recovers over the water.
If you were to imagine that you are lying on a clock face with your head at the 12 o’clock position, your right arm will enter straight and inline with your shoulder at 11 o’clock. Your little finger will enter the water first with your palm facing outwards.
As your right arm enters the water, your body will rotate towards the entering arm. Your arm will start to bend so that the palm and forearm are facing towards your feet. When the elbow gets to a 90 degree bend, push the water towards your hip.
As your right arm nears your hip, it will extend and your palm will turn in towards your hip to finish the arm pull.
While this is happening, your left arm will be entering the water at 1 o’clock and the body rotates towards the entering arm.
As your body rotates, your right thumb or back of wrist will exit the water first. Your right arm will be straight and it will rotate during the recovery so that your hand can enter the water little finger first.
Swimming Strokes
Discover swimming at your local pool
Find pools
Use current location
Other articles from this section
Improve your kicking in breaststroke
Improve your breathing in front crawl
The best swimming stroke for weight loss
Tips for getting breaststroke right
© Copyright 2026
Swimming.orgPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseCookie PolicySwim England Jobs
Website by Skylab
