TITLE:  Getting Backstroke right | Tips and video to help you get started
URL:    https://www.swimming.org/justswim/getting-backstroke-right/
LENGTH: 3751 characters of rendered text

This site uses cookies to store information on your computer.

We use essential cookies to make this website work, including those required for secure payments processed by Stripe and PayPal. These cookies enable safe transactions, fraud prevention, and session integrity.

We’d also like to use optional cookies to improve your experience by collecting information about how you use the site.

For more information, please see our Cookie Policy.

Accept all cookiesDeny non-essential cookies
Necessary Cookies

Necessary cookies enable core functionality such as page navigation and access to secure areas. The website cannot function properly without these cookies, and can only be disabled by changing your browser preferences.

Analytical Cookies

Analytical cookies help us to improve our website by collecting and reporting information on its usage.

Show vendors within this category
analytics
On
Off
Marketing Cookies

We use marketing cookies to help us improve the relevancy of suggested content and advertising campaigns.

Show vendors within this category
marketing
On
Off
Functional Cookies

Functional cookies enable enhanced features and personalisation, such as remembering preferences or enabling chat support. These cookies do not track users across other websites.

Show vendors within this category
functional
On
Off
Close
Swimming.org
Swim England
Safeguarding and Welfare
Our Sports
Members
Learn to Swim
Institute of Swimming
PoolFinder

Login / Register

More
 Just Swim
Home
About
Love Swimming
Be Healthier
Be Fitter
Be Happier
Tips for getting backstroke right

Getting backstroke right isn’t easy. Next to butterfly it is one of the most difficult strokes. Learning all the main swimming strokes comes after you have mastered the basic skills of swimming. This is during Stage 3 of the Learn to Swim Pathway for adults learning to swim. But the strokes can take a lifetime to master.

If you feel you have reached a point with breaststroke where you are ready to develop then we have collated some tips for you below. There is also a short video to help you get it right. If you are not there yet, head over to the swimming.org Learn section for more on learning to swim.

Tips for getting backstroke right
Float on your back, with your ears just in the water and eyes looking up; stretch your body as long as possible.
Keep your legs long with pointed toes; kick your legs up and down (alternating) making your ankles as floppy as possible, using your feet like flippers. Keep knees under the water with your toes making a small splash. Kick your legs fast and continuously.
Start with your arms stretched down the side of your body. Your arm should be kept straight bringing it out of the water over the top in an arc action. Enter your hands into the water with your little fingers first, keeping your arm straight. Pull your arm under the water all the way to the thigh. Keep pulling your arms in a continuous movement as one arm enters, the other is ready to exit at the thigh.
A breath is taken regularly as and when required and at least once during the stroke.
A Quick Video Tutorial

This short video from Nuffield Health will help you get your technique right. Remember, practice makes perfect.

Love Swimming
Swimming Strokes
Discover swimming at your local pool
Find pools
Use current location
Other articles from this section
Why summer holiday water safety starts in the swimming pool
How swimming lessons benefit children beyond the pool
More than 70% of children taken out of lessons before they're competent in water
Swimming has helped Finlay ‘engage in so many other aspects of life’ says mum Candace
© Copyright 2026
Swimming.orgPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseCookie PolicySwim England Jobs
Website by Skylab
