TITLE:  Tips to help overcome a fear of swimming
URL:    https://www.swimming.org/learntoswim/tips-to-help-overcome-a-fear-of-swimming/
LENGTH: 3347 characters of rendered text

This site uses cookies to store information on your computer.

We use essential cookies to make this website work, including those required for secure payments processed by Stripe and PayPal. These cookies enable safe transactions, fraud prevention, and session integrity.

We’d also like to use optional cookies to improve your experience by collecting information about how you use the site.

For more information, please see our Cookie Policy.

Accept all cookiesDeny non-essential cookies
Necessary Cookies

Necessary cookies enable core functionality such as page navigation and access to secure areas. The website cannot function properly without these cookies, and can only be disabled by changing your browser preferences.

Analytical Cookies

Analytical cookies help us to improve our website by collecting and reporting information on its usage.

Show vendors within this category
analytics
On
Off
Marketing Cookies

We use marketing cookies to help us improve the relevancy of suggested content and advertising campaigns.

Show vendors within this category
marketing
On
Off
Functional Cookies

Functional cookies enable enhanced features and personalisation, such as remembering preferences or enabling chat support. These cookies do not track users across other websites.

Show vendors within this category
functional
On
Off
Close
Swimming.org
Swim England
Safeguarding and Welfare
Our Sports
Members
Learn to Swim
Institute of Swimming
PoolFinder

Login / Register

More
 Learn to Swim

Learn to Swim

A guide to the Learn to Swim Programme

Home
About
Awards
Parents
Learners
Teachers
My Learn To Swim App
Buy Awards
More
Help to overcome a fear of swimming
Learners

To overcome a fear of swimming can be difficult. It can hold many people back from learning to swim, but it doesn’t have to be that way.

Rio2016 Olympic gold medal winner Adam Peaty was afraid of water as a child. He worked to overcome it and became a champion. If you are nervous of getting in the pool don’t worry, you’re not alone and help is at hand.

Most pools offer adult classes in a friendly and supportive environment and you’ll meet plenty of people going through the same experience as you.

A few tips to help overcome a fear of swimming
Start by getting your feet wet and try to gradually get deeper into the water
When you can stand in water deep enough splash water on your face as if you are washing it. At the same time think of positive images while you are splashing your face.
Next try to learn to hold your breath under the water and breathe out into the water. Basically, blow bubbles!
Hold the side and practice kicking with your body stretched out
Don’t feel rushed to make progress.
And finally, remember you are not alone. Comedian Frank Skinner was 55 when he decided to face his ultimate fear and learn to swim for the Big Splash Mile for Sport Relief. He said: “I really threw myself in at the deep end and faced one of my biggest phobias, swimming, by completing a 25 metre width. It felt great to challenge myself.”
Video to help overcome a fear of swimming

This video from Speedo with Sports Psychologist Julie Johnston could also help. She highlights some of the tips we cover to overcome a fear of swimming.

Tips and Advice
© Copyright 2026
Swimming.orgPrivacy PolicyTerms of UseCookie PolicySwim England Jobs
Website by Skylab
