TITLE:  Should You Breathe to Both Sides in Freestyle? | U.S. Masters Swimming
URL:    https://www.usms.org/fitness-and-training/articles-and-videos/articles/should-you-breathe-to-both-sides-in-freestyle
LENGTH: 7270 characters of rendered text

SEARCH
Training
Events
Club Finder
Workout Library
About Us
Join
SEARCH
LOG IN
Home 
Articles And Videos 
Should You Breathe To Both Sides In Freestyle?
Should You Breathe to Both Sides in Freestyle?
by Scott Bay

May 5, 2021

Here’s how to determine whether bilateral breathing is right for you

Seasoned swimmers might remember a time when coaches forced freestylers to breathe to both sides, also known as bilateral breathing. Times sure have changed.

By breathing largely to his right en route to setting world records in the 200, 400, 800, and 1500 freestyle events and winning seven Olympic medals, Australian Grant Hackett showed the world that you don’t have to bilaterally breathe to be a successful swimmer.

So, should you breathe to both sides or just one?

Why bilateral breathing is a good idea

There’s some wisdom in bilateral breathing. Here are some compelling reasons why you shouldn’t only learn it but also practice it on a regular basis.

Avoid muscular imbalance. Back in the day, coaches were primarily concerned with making sure you didn’t have an asymmetrical stroke, which they thought would lead to slower swimming. The better reason, especially for competitive and fitness Masters swimmers, is that bilateral breathing helps prevent or correct muscular imbalances from repetitive motions to one side only.
Zone training. Coaches used to think that swimmers should train their bodies with less oxygen. Although this is a good idea to a minimal extent, oxygen demand is based on your body’s needs. Burning oxygen as fuel is part of what swimmers do. But training a breathing pattern such as breathing every third stroke is also beneficial for learning how to relax those parts of your body that aren’t helping you swim and for decreasing oxygen demand.
See the big picture. Competitive pool and open water swimmers need to see to both sides of the course and where their competitors are. Also, in open water, if you’re getting splashed in the face by choppy water when breathing into the wind, being able to get air easily on the other side is great. Developing this skill in the pool first reduces the anxiety for when you need to do it in the open water.
Why bilateral breathing might be a bad idea

Here’s the case for not bilaterally breathing on a regular basis.

Injury. Some swimmers have injuries or other physical issues that prevent them from bilateral breathing. Lifelong swimmers who didn’t learn to breathe to both sides in their youth have developed muscle memory and structural imbalances from a lifetime of breathing to one side and that’s hard to change. It can be done, but it isn’t required to enjoy your swimming. If bilateral breathing causes discomfort and you just don’t want to take the time to learn to breathe on your other side, just keep breathing to one side.
Optimal racing. Hackett and many other elite swimmers who breathe to just one side cast doubt on if the idea that breathing to one side is all that bad. Your body has a need for oxygen for fuel, especially in sprints. Some swimmers will breathe bilaterally in practice but revert to a favored side when racing. This is perfectly fine.
What’s right for you?

So, should you breathe bilaterally? If so, how much should you do it and when?

If you’re a lifelong unilateral breather and want to learn to breathe bilaterally, use fins or a pull-buoy to start the process of evening up the muscles that move your head and getting your body used to the unfamiliar side. Take plenty of time and gradually increase the amount of yardage in which you breathe to both sides. Start with warm-up and warm-down, and gradually work it into your sets.

Have a coach or a friend take a video of you breathing to your dominant side, your off-side, and then to both sides. Compare your stroke technique and stroke rates, as well as your times. It’s amazing what you can learn from visual feedback, and it may make you a better, healthier, and faster swimmer.

As in all things Masters swimming, the most important thing is to enjoy your swimming and do what’s right for you.

Want to learn more about improving your freestyle? Check out our Freestyle Guide featuring tips, drills, sets, dryland exercises, and videos. 

Categories:

TECHNIQUE AND TRAINING

Tags:

BREATHING
FREESTYLE
About The Author
Scott Bay

Scott Bay is a USMS-certified Masters coach and an ASCA Level 5 coach and has been actively coaching and teaching swimming since 1986 to swimmers of all ages. The Masters swimmers he currently coaches include national champions, All Americans, and world record holders, who have swum to more than 300 Top 10 swims and 30 world records in just the past 5 years. Throughout his career Bay has taught thousands how to swim or how to swim better. He’s also written numerous articles on technique and coaching and contributed to USMS’s coach certification curriculum. Bay presents at clinics across the country and has written an instructional book, “Swimming Steps to Success.” (Human Kinetics, 2015). Bay is the past chair of the USMS Coaches Committee, and the Head Coach of YCF Masters.

SIGN UP FOR UPDATES FROM USMS

SIGN UP
Related Articles
ARTICLE
Pool Training for Open Water Swimming: Skills that Actually Transfer

Elaine K. Howley

ARTICLE
Go On—Skip a Day

David McGlynn

ARTICLE
Ask the Coach: Linda Bailey

Jeff Commings

ARTICLE
Sweet Potatoes Four Ways

Sarah Koszyk, MA, RDN, NBC-HWC

About USMS
What is Masters Swimming?
Mission Vision Values
Development Programs
Organizational Structure
Staff
National Committees and Assignments
Local Masters Swimming Committees
USMS History
Partners
Diversity & Inclusion
College Club Swimming
Grown-Up Swimming
Logo Merchandise
Donate to ALTS Grants
SWIMMER magazine
STREAMLINES Newsletters
Community
Try Masters Swimming
Join
Join or Renew
Membership Benefits
Trial Membership Form
USMS+
Membership Comparison
Pool and Open Water Events
Calendar of Events
Event Development Program
Sanction an Event
Open Water Central
Fitness Events
National Championships
Event Results
Rankings
Records
Top 10
All-American
All-Stars
World Aquatics Masters Championships
Pan Am Masters Championships
Stroke Development Clinic
Club Central
Club Central
How to Start a Club
Register - Renew - Update Club
Club Resources
Gold Club Designation
Insurance
Club Development Program
Membership Lists
Coach Central
Coach Central
Become a Coach
National Coaches Clinic
Coach Certification
Certified Coaches
Designated Coach Resources
Continuing Education
Mentor Coach Program
Coaching Jobs
ALTS Central
ALTS Central
April Is Adult Learn-to-Swim Month
Donate to ALTS Grants
ALTS Grants
How to Apply for a Grant
Adult Learn-to-Swim Initiatives
Instructor Certification
Fitness and Training
Club Finder
Freestyle Guide
Workout Library
Training Plans
Fitness Logs
Swim.com Integration
Articles and Videos
Swimming 101
Learn to Swim
Triathletes
Governance
Rule Book
Organizational Policies
Guidelines, Procedures, and Forms
Event Management and Sanctioning
LMSC Operations and Resources
Meeting Minutes
Volunteers
Volunteer Central
Annual Meeting
Volunteer Relay
Elections
Committee Assignments
Officials
Guide to Local Operations
LMSC Resources
Awards
Meeting Minutes

JOIN NOW
© 2026 U.S. Masters Swimming
Contact Us
USMS Privacy Policy
