TITLE:  Drills to Help You Build Your Lung Strength and Improve Your Freestyle Breathing Pattern | U.S. Masters Swimming
URL:    https://www.usms.org/fitness-and-training/articles-and-videos/articles/drills-thatll-help-you-build-your-lung-strength-and-improve-your-freestyle-breathing-pattern
LENGTH: 6212 characters of rendered text

SEARCH
Training
Events
Club Finder
Workout Library
About Us
Join
SEARCH
LOG IN
Home 
Articles And Videos 
Drills To Help You Build Your Lung Strength And Improve Your Freestyle Breathing Pattern
Drills to Help You Build Your Lung Strength and Improve Your Freestyle Breathing Pattern
by Michael Botyarov

September 20, 2021

Try these two drills to help with your freestyle

Swimming is considered more difficult to learn than other endurance sports because of the complications associated with being in the water. The most obvious one is the need to breathe air in an aquatic environment.

Effective and efficient breathing patterns are crucial to master in order to become a good swimmer. A breathing pattern is best described as your rhythm related to how often you take a breath while you’re swimming. The optimal freestyle breathing pattern often depends on the distance you’re going to be swimming.

When you’re swimming, your muscles use oxygen to function and propel you forward with every stroke. The faster you swim, the more oxygen your muscles need, so establishing a breathing pattern is important.

In short sprint races, such as the 100 freestyle, your body will need substantially more oxygen since you’ll be swimming at an all-out effort. In these shorter races, you tend to kick a lot faster as well, and your leg muscles are large and require a lot of oxygen to function efficiently.

Freestylers either breathe just to one side or breathe to both sides, which is called bilateral breathing. Both have advantages depending on your previous swimming experience and where you’re racing.

Regardless of the type of breathing pattern you choose, performing breathing pattern drills will help you breathe more efficiently, thereby improving your lung capacity. Breathing pattern drills to consider implementing into your swim workouts include what I’ll call new-school hypoxic drills and old-school hypoxic drills.

To perform the new-school hypoxic drill, swim regular freestyle but only take a breath when you absolutely must. This could be every other stroke or once per length. The key here is to make sure you don’t hold your breath, which can be dangerous. Exhale as you swim, letting air out slowly as if you’re humming. This drill improves lung capacity over time because you’re swimming as far as you can prior to taking a breath. It’s best to start using new-school hypoxic sets in 50s or 100s, building up the distance as you become more comfortable with the drill.

To perform the old-school hypoxic drill, swim regular freestyle but take a breath on a set pattern, such as every three or six strokes. If you’re a single-side breather, you’ll choose an even number. Bilateral breathers will choose an odd number of strokes. As you swim, focus on keeping a steady pace and breathing on your assigned number of strokes. As with the new-school hypoxic drill, start the old-school hypoxic drill in sets of 50s or 100s, building up the distance as you get more comfortable with the drill. (Again, don’t hold your breath will performing this drill. Doing so can be dangerous. Instead, release your air underwater during the time between breaths.)

You can also consider building the breathing pattern by 25s or 50s such that you decrease the quantity of breaths you take. For example, if you swim a 200 doing the old-school hypoxic drill, you can try breathing every four strokes the first 50, every six strokes the second 50, every eight strokes the third 50, and every ten strokes the last 50. Doing so will also help increase your lung capacity over time.

Looking for more great information about swimming? Check out our Swimming 101 guide featuring swimming pool and stroke basics, how to start swim training as an adult, and more. You can also see if a USMS club is in your area through our Club Finder.

Categories:

TECHNIQUE AND TRAINING

Tags:

BREATHING
DRILLS
FREESTYLE
About The Author
Michael Botyarov
Michael Botyarov is a coach with Colorado Masters Swimming.

SIGN UP FOR UPDATES FROM USMS

SIGN UP
Related Articles
ARTICLE
Pool Training for Open Water Swimming: Skills that Actually Transfer

Elaine K. Howley

ARTICLE
How Triathletes Should Use Masters Swimming to Improve Swim Times

Elaine K. Howley

ARTICLE
From the Center Lanes: Sandie Easton

Jeff Commings

ARTICLE
Home Pool Advantage

Elaine K. Howley

About USMS
What is Masters Swimming?
Mission Vision Values
Development Programs
Organizational Structure
Staff
National Committees and Assignments
Local Masters Swimming Committees
USMS History
Partners
Diversity & Inclusion
College Club Swimming
Grown-Up Swimming
Logo Merchandise
Donate to ALTS Grants
SWIMMER magazine
STREAMLINES Newsletters
Community
Try Masters Swimming
Join
Join or Renew
Membership Benefits
Trial Membership Form
USMS+
Membership Comparison
Pool and Open Water Events
Calendar of Events
Event Development Program
Sanction an Event
Open Water Central
Fitness Events
National Championships
Event Results
Rankings
Records
Top 10
All-American
All-Stars
World Aquatics Masters Championships
Pan Am Masters Championships
Stroke Development Clinic
Club Central
Club Central
How to Start a Club
Register - Renew - Update Club
Club Resources
Gold Club Designation
Insurance
Club Development Program
Membership Lists
Coach Central
Coach Central
Become a Coach
National Coaches Clinic
Coach Certification
Certified Coaches
Designated Coach Resources
Continuing Education
Mentor Coach Program
Coaching Jobs
ALTS Central
ALTS Central
April Is Adult Learn-to-Swim Month
Donate to ALTS Grants
ALTS Grants
How to Apply for a Grant
Adult Learn-to-Swim Initiatives
Instructor Certification
Fitness and Training
Club Finder
Freestyle Guide
Workout Library
Training Plans
Fitness Logs
Swim.com Integration
Articles and Videos
Swimming 101
Learn to Swim
Triathletes
Governance
Rule Book
Organizational Policies
Guidelines, Procedures, and Forms
Event Management and Sanctioning
LMSC Operations and Resources
Meeting Minutes
Volunteers
Volunteer Central
Annual Meeting
Volunteer Relay
Elections
Committee Assignments
Officials
Guide to Local Operations
LMSC Resources
Awards
Meeting Minutes

JOIN NOW
© 2026 U.S. Masters Swimming
Contact Us
USMS Privacy Policy
